** # Natural Numbers $\mathbb{N}$


## Axioms of Natural Numbers 

- **N1.** $1$ belongs to $\mathbb{N}$
- **N2.** If $n$ belongs to $\mathbb{N}$, then its successor $n+1$ belongs to $\mathbb{N}$
- **N3.** $1$ is not the successor of any element in $\mathbb{N}.$
- **N4.** If $n$ and $m$ in $\mathbb{N}$ have the same successor, then $n=m$.
- **N5.** A subset of $\mathbb{N}$ which contains $1$, and which contains $n+1$ whenever it contains $n,$   must equal $\mathbb{N}.$
	   - $1 \in S$
	   - If $n \in S$ , then $n+1 \in S$
      and yet $S \neq \mathbb{N}$. 
      Consider the smallest member of the set $\{n \in \mathbb{N}\::\:n \notin S \}$ , call it $n_{0}$ .
      Since $1 \in S$ holds, it is clear $n_{0} \neq 1$ . So $n_{0}$ is a successor to some number in $\mathbb{N}$, namely $n_{0}-1$ .  (**N2**)
      We have $n_{0}-1 \in S$ since $n_{0}$ is the smallest member of $\{ n \in \mathbb{N}\::\: n\notin S \}$  .
      By the second property, the successor of $n_{0}-1$ , namely $n_{0}$ , is also in $S$ , which is a contradiction.

**N5** is the basis of Mathematical Induction
**N1** and **N5** are known as ***Peano Axioms*** 

---

## Mathematical Induction

Let $P_{1}, P_{2}, P_{3}, \dots$  be a list of statements or propositions that may or may not be true. The principle of mathematical induction asserts all the statements $P_{1},P_{2},P_{3}\dots$  are true provided
- $P_{1}$ is true.  $-$ **called the Basis**
- $P_{n+1}$ is true whenever $P_{n}$ is true.

One of the well known derived results from Induction is the [[6.Cosets#Well Ordering Principle|Well Ordering Principle ]]

##### Example 1.1
Prove $1+2+3 + \dots + n = \frac{1}{2} n (n+1)$  for positive integers $n$ 

> Let, $P_{n}: 1+2+3 + \dots + n = \frac{1}{2} n (n+1)$ 
> Then, 
> 	$P_{1} : 1 = \frac{1}{2}\cdot 1 \cdot(1+1)$  which is true.
> 	$P_{2} : 1 + 2 = \frac{1}{2}\cdot 2 \cdot (2+1)$  which is also true.
> Thus we have satisfied both properties of Induction.
> Now, suppose $P_{n}$ is true. Let us calculate $P_{n+1}$ 
$$
\begin{align}
1+2+\dots+n+(n+1) &= \frac{1}{2}n(n+1) + (n+1) \\ \\
&= \frac{1}{2}[n(n+1)+2(n+1)] \\ \\
&= \frac{1}{2} (n+1)(n+2) \\ \\
&=\frac{1}{2}(n+1)((n+1)+1)
\end{align}
$$
> Thus $P_{n+1}$ holds if $P_{n}$ holds. By Induction we conclude $P_{n}$ is true for all $n.$ 

#### Note
We did not prove "$P_{n+1}$ is true". We merely proved an implication. If $P_{n}$ is true, then $P_{n+1}$ is true. In a sense we proved an infinite number of assertions.


##### Example 1.2
Prove all numbers of the form $5^{n}-4n-1$ are divisible by $16.$

> $P_{n} : 5^{n}-4n-1$ is divisible by $16$
> The basis will be, 
> 	$P_{1} : 5^{1}-4\cdot 1 - 1 = 0$   $-$ which is true.
> And,
> 	$P_{2}:5^{2}-4\cdot 2 - 1 =16$  $-$ which is also true.
> 
>  Thus we can apply Induction
>  Suppose $P_{n}$ is true. Thus we check $P_{n+1}$ 
>  $5^{n+1} - 4(n+1) - 1 = 5(5^{n}-4n-1)+16n$ 
>  Since $5^{n}-4n-1$ is a multiple of $16$.
>  Then, $P_{n+1}$ is also a multiple of $16$.
>  Hence we conclude a number of form $5^{n}-4n-1$ is divisible by 16

---

# Rational Numbers $\mathbb{Q}$

### Properties of Rational Numbers

$A1 \color{#d693f5}\text{ (Associative Law)}:$ $a+(b+c) = (a+b)+c$  for all $a,b,c$   
$A2 \color{#d693f5}\text{ (Commutative Law)}:$ $a+b=b+a$  for all $a,b$
$A3:$ $a+0 =a$  for all $a$
$A4:$ For each $a$ , there is an element $-a$ such that $a+(-a)=0$ 
$M1 \color{#d693f5}\text{ (Associative Law)}:$ $a \cdot (bc)=(ab) \cdot c$  for all $a,b,c$ 
$M2 \color{#d693f5}\text{ (Commutative Law)}:$ $ab=ba$  for all $a,b$
$M3:$ $a \cdot 1 = a$  for all $a$
$M4:$ For each $a \neq 0$ , there is an element $a^{-1}$ such that $a a^{-1}=1$ 
$DL \color{#d693f5}\text{ (Distributive Law)} :$ $a(b+c)=ab+ac$  for all $a,b,c$  

### Ordered Field 

$O1:$ Given $a$ and $b$ , either $a \leq b$  or  $b \leq a$ 
$O2:$ If $a \leq b$ and $b \leq a$ , then $a = b$ 
$O 3 \color{#d693f5}\text{ (Transitive Law)}:$ If $a \leq b$ and $b \leq c$ , then $a \leq c$
$O 4:$ If $a \leq b$ , then $a+c \leq b+c$ 
$O 5:$ If $a \leq b$ and $0 \leq c$ , then $ac \leq bc$


## Algebraic Numbers

A Number that satisfies a polynomial equation
$$c_{n}x^{n}+c_{n-1}x^{n-1}+\dots+c_{1}x + c_{0} = 0$$
where $c_{i} \in \mathbb{Z}$ , $c_{n} \neq 0$  and  $n \geq 1$

- Rational Numbers are always Algebraic Numbers.
- Numbers defined in terms of $\sqrt{  }$ , $\sqrt[3]{  }$ , etc. (fractional exponents) and ordinary algebraic operations on the rational numbers are invariably algebraic numbers

##### Example 
$\frac{4}{17}$ , $\sqrt{ 3 }$ , $\sqrt[3]{ 17 }$ , $\sqrt{ 2+\sqrt[3]{ 5 } }$  and  $\sqrt{ \frac{4-2\sqrt{ 3 }}{7}}$   are all algebraic numbers

---

### Rational Zeros Theorem

Suppose $c_{0}, c_{1}, \dots ,c_{n}$ are integers and $r$ is a rational number satisfying the polynomial equation
$$c_{n}x^{n}+c_{n-1}x^{n-1}+\dots+c_{1}x + c_{0} = 0$$
where $n \geq 1$ , $c_{n} \neq 0$  and $c_{0} \neq 0$ . Let $r = \frac{c}{d}$ where $c, d$ are integers having no common factors and $d \neq 0$ . Then $c$ divides $c_{0}$ and $d$ divides $c_{n}$ .

In other words, the only rational candidates for solutions of the above equation have the form $\frac{c}{d}$ where $c$ divides $c_{0}$ and $d$ divides $c_{n}$

###### Proof
$$
c_{n}\left( \frac{c}{d} \right)^{n} + c_{n-1}\left( \frac{c}{d} \right)^{n-1} + \dots+ c_{1}\left( \frac{c}{d} \right) + c_{0} = 0
$$
We multiply through by $d^{n}$ 
$$ c_{n}c^{n}+c_{n-1}c^{n-1}d + \dots + c_{1}c^{1}d^{n-1} + c_{0}d^{n} = 0$$
We solve for $c_{0}d^{n}$ 
$$c_{0}d^{n} = -c[c_{n}c^{n-1}+c_{n-1}c^{n-2}d+ \dots + c_{1}d^{n-1}]$$Thus we see that $c$ divides $c_{0}d^{n}$. But $c$ and $d^{n}$ have no common factors, so $c$ divides $c_{0}$. 

Now we solve for $c_{n}c^{n}$ and obtain
$$c_{n}c^{n}=-d[c_{n-1}c^{n-1} + c_{n-2}c^{n-2}d + \dots + c_{0}d^{n-1}]$$
Thus $d$ divides $c_{n}c^{n}$ . Since $c_{n}$ and $d$ have no common factors $d$ divides $c_{n}$ .  

--- 

#### Corollary 1.1
Consider the polynomial equation
$$
x^{n}+c_{n-1}x^{n-1}+\dots+c_{1}x+c_{0} = 0
$$
where the coefficients $c_{0},c_{1},\dots,c_{n-1}$ are integers and $c_{0}\neq 0$ . Any rational solution of this equation must be an integer that divides $c_{0}$ .

##### Proof
> In the [[1. Number System#Rational Zeros Theorem|Rational Zeros Theorem]] , the denominator $r$ must divide the coefficient of $x^{n}$ , which is $1$ in this case. Thus $r$ is an integer and it divides $c_{0}$.

---

##### Example
$\sqrt{ 17 }$ is not a rational number.

The only possible rational solutions of $x^{2}-17=0$ are $\pm 1 , \pm 17,$ and none of these numbers are solutions.

---

# Real Numbers $\mathbb{R}$

The Set $\mathbb{R}$ will include all rational numbers, all algebraic numbers, $\pi$ , $e$ and more..
We will define the set $\mathbb{R}$ entirely in terms of the set $\mathbb{Q}$ .
Meaning $\mathbb{R}$ will satisfy all properties [[1. Number System#Properties of Rational Numbers |A1 through A2, M1 through M2 and DL]] . 
The set $\mathbb{R}$ also has an order structure $\leq$ that satisfies properties [[1. Number System#Ordered Field |O1 through O5]] .
Thus, like $\mathbb{Q}$ , $\mathbb{R}$ is an [[1. Number System#Ordered Field|Ordered Field]] .

#### Theorem 1.1
The following are consequences of the field properties:


