Let $(G, \ast)$ and $(H,\odot)$ be two groups

A group **Isomorphism** from $(G, \ast)$ to $(H, \odot)$ is a $1-1$ correspondence 
$$
\begin{align} \\
\phi: G \rightarrow H
\end{align}
$$
such that
$$
\begin{align}
\phi(x \ast y) =   \phi(x) \odot \phi(y)
\end{align}
$$
for all $x,y$ in $G$.

We say that two groups are isomorphic if there exists a group isomorphism from one to the other

> To make my pea brain understand, when two multiplication table of two function are similar or in some sense the same

***For Ex.***

>Let $\mathbb{R}_{+}$ be the set of positive real numbers.
>
>where it is a group under binary operation of multiplication.
>
>We denote this group by $(\mathbb{R}_{+}, \cdot)$


>Let $\phi(x)=a^{x}$. $$

\begin{align}

\phi(x+y)  & = a^{x+y} \\

&=a^{x}\cdot a^{y} \\

&=\phi(x)\cdot \phi(y)

\end{align}

$$

Thus, $\phi$ is a group isomorphism. So $(\mathbb{R}_{+}, \cdot)$ is a isomorphic to $(\mathbb{R}, +)$.

### Theorem 1
***Note: Isomorphism preserves identity and inverses***
>If $\phi: G \rightarrow H$ be an isomorphism. Then,
>
>	1. $\phi(1_{G}) = 1_{H}$
>	2. For any $x \in G$ , $\phi(x^{-1}) = \phi(x)^{-1}$
>	***Proof:***
>		$\phi(1_{G}) = \phi(1_{G}\cdot 1_{G}) = \phi(1_{G})\cdot \phi(1_{G})$
>		By [[1.Groups#Cancellation Property|cancellation property]] we get
>			 $\phi(1_{G}) = 1_{H}$
>		
>		Let $x$ be any element of $G$
>		Then
>			$\phi(x\cdot x^{-1}) = \phi(x)\cdot \phi(x^{-1})$
>			But,
>			$\phi(x\cdot x^{-1}) = \phi(1_{G})=1_{H}$
>			So,
>			$\phi(x^{-1}) = \phi(x)^{-1}$

### Theorem 2
> Let $G$ and $H$ be groups. Let $\phi:G \rightarrow H$ be a group isomorphism.
> Then, the function $\phi ^{-1}: H \rightarrow G$ is also a group isomorphism
> 
> ***Proof:***
> 	We know $\phi ^{-1}$ is a $1-1$ correspondence.
> 	We need to verify that if $x, y$ are in $H$, then,
> 		$\phi ^{-1}(xy) = \phi ^{-1}(x)\cdot \phi ^{-1}(y)$
> 
> 	We observe that
> 	$$

\begin{align}

\phi[\phi ^{-1}(x)\cdot \phi ^{-1}(y)] &= \phi[\phi ^{-1}(x)] \cdot \phi[\phi ^{-1}(y)] \\

&=xy

\end{align} 

$$
>	But we also have,
>		$\phi[\phi ^{-1}(xy)] = xy$
>	 As $\phi ^{-1}(xy)$ and $\phi ^{-1}(x)\cdot \phi ^{-1}(y)$
>	 have the same image under $\phi$, they must be equal.
>	 This completes the proofs

---------------------------------------------------
